---
title: Storm's Crown (Extreme)
fight_title: SCEX
difficulty: extreme
card_image: /img/encounters/extreme/storms-crown-normal-and-extreme-trial.webp
banner_image: /img/encounters/extreme/storms-crown-normal-and-extreme-trial.webp
tier_name: The Four Fiends
series_name: Endwalker
weight: 1
tier_weight: 1
expansion: ew
authors:
  - dook
lastmod: 2022-08-25T20:02:11.687Z
patch: "6.2"
tags:
  - Extreme
  - encounter guide
  - fight guide
---
# Storm's Crown (Extreme) Introduction

The Storm's Crown (Extreme is an 8-man encounter released with Patch 6.2, Buried Memories. This fight requires a minimum item level of 600, but this requirement may be bypassed with a preformed party. To unlock the Extreme version of this fight, a player must have completed the Normal mode, unlocked through the MSQ, then talk to the Wandering Minstrel in Old Sharlayan (X: 12.6, Y: 14.2). This Trial drops weapons with an item level of 615 and a chance to drop the following: Faded Copy of Battle with the Four Winds Orchestration Roll, a Lynx of Imperious Wind Flute, and the Pearl of the Winds crafting material.

## Party Setup

Before the fight even begins, the party will want to choose clock positions for mechanics further in the fight. It is suggested to place tanks and healers on the cardinal positions (North, East, South, and West) while placing DPS on the intercardinals (North-East, South-East, South-West, North-West). Once that's been sorted out, the group should then split into light parties, or two groups of four players. Simply place one tank, one healer, and two DPS in each group.

### Party Finder Macro

The following macro can be used to resolve party setup in a Party Finder environment.

<pre><code>

■ Spread　　■ Playstation
　D3 MT D4　   □　　  ○
　H1　　H2　　　　　
　D1 ST  D2　　×　    △
【4:4 stacks】MTH1D1D3←→STH2D2D4
【Twisting Tangle】NE + SW
【Enumeration Pairs】MTD4, H2D2, STD1, H1D3 (TH rotate cw)
【Mario Kart】Start North, run cw
【2x Flares + stack】MT→NE　ST→NW　stack→S
【PS1 spread】DPS → CCW　T/H → CW
【PS2 pairs】Walk in unless enums next to each other

</pre></code>

### Waymarker Information

If using the Waymarker plug-in, the following text will allow you to import waymarkers for the fight.

{"Name":"Imported","MapID":871,"A":{"X":100.539,"Y":0.0,"Z":81.9,"ID":0,"Active":true},"B":{"X":118.647,"Y":0.0,"Z":100.6,"ID":1,"Active":true},"C":{"X":100.148,"Y":0.0,"Z":118.931,"ID":2,"Active":true},"D":{"X":81.636,"Y":0.0,"Z":100.778,"ID":3,"Active":true},"One":{"X":106.187,"Y":0.0,"Z":94.324,"ID":4,"Active":true},"Two":{"X":105.502,"Y":0.0,"Z":107.311,"ID":5,"Active":true},"Three":{"X":95.304,"Y":0.0,"Z":107.647,"ID":6,"Active":true},"Four":{"X":94.754,"Y":0.0,"Z":94.929,"ID":7,"Active":true}}

## Mechanic Descriptions 

The mechanics will be listed in the order that they appear:

**Void Aero IV** - Moderate raid wide damage on all party members.

**Savage Barbery** - A two part mechanic. Combines either an in/out AoE with Barbariccia throwing her sword to the edge of the arena.

**Hair Raid** - A two part mechanic. Combines either a light party stack or a spread with one of two AoE combinations; a cone AoE from the wall, or a donut AoE under the boss.

**Void Aero III** - A tank buster that places a vuln up on the tank who takes damage.

**Upbraid** - A stack requiring a specific amount of people inside of it. For this fight, the stack requires two players inside when the damage resolves.

**Secret Breeze** - Conal AoE that can be dodged.

**Teasing Tangle** - All eight players are separated into groups of two and slowed by the pillar of hair within their circle. Each pair will receive either a large AoE and an Upbraid, or a large AoE and no debuff. The boss will cleave the hair towers with Secret Breeze, followed by conal AoEs placed on all eight players which places a magic vulnerability up on all players.

**Curling Iron** - Places a wind AoE under the boss that does minor damage and knocks players back who are caught within it.

**Brutal Rush** - A line AoE targeted at a player, generated by a clone of the boss.

**Swirly** - Creates a swirling AoE on the arena. (Needs real name)

**Brittle Boulder** - Small circular AoE centered on the player.

**Knuckle Drum** - Several raid wide damage instances. Each hit deals minor damage, successive hits must be healed through.

**Blow Away** - Minor raid wide damage, initiates the start of several ground AoEs being placed on players.

**Impact** - Minor raid wide damage, knocks all players back from the middle of the arena. Anti-knockback can be used to avoid this. 

**Bold Boulder** - Proximity AoEs placed on tanks.

**Trample** - Stack damage applied to a non-tank player.

**Dry Blows** - Minor raid wide damage.

**Iron Out** - Minor raid wide damage, acts as an arena transition

**Entanglement** - All eight players are marked into pairs of two, chained together with hair, and then placed within a small circular AoE.

5Now that the prep is out of the way lets get to the fight. I’ll keep this timeline on the side to show where we are at, where we were, and where we’re going for when you review the parts of the fight and want the order.

 

6The first mechanic is Void Aero IV – this is a standard raid wide

 

7Following this is Savage Barbery this is a two part mechanic.

8          The first thing to look for is the direction she’s throwing the sword by noticing the indicator, you will be moving away from this

9          Next look at how she is holding the sword if it’s a forward low stance like this you will stay inside her hitbox. If it’s a high stance like this you will be outside her hitbox. Remember, always opposite the direction of the indicator.

 

10Following every Savage Barbery is Hair Raid. This is also a two step mechanic

11       First look at wether she crouches to the ground or stands tall. If she crouches you need to run to the sword she threw, if she stands tall you stay in her hitbox

12       Next she will either indicate stack or spread. If you are stack its easy enough.

13       For spread it matters wether its in her hitbox or at the wall. For in her hitbox you just move out to your clockspot. If its at the wall use the same side as your light party group. (Let melee take the closer positions) You can also move out after the cleave if you want.

 

14She then repeats these two mechanics doing the opposite version she originally did. As you can see we had inside the hitbox for savage and then in and spread for hair raid. So this time we get out of hitbox savage and wall with stack for hair raid.

 

15Void Aero IV is used again

 

16A new mechanic is Void Aero III – this is a simple 2 hit tank buster that requires an immunity or swap.

 

17Teasing Tangles – you will be stunned and automatically pair in dps + tank or healer pairs.

18       Using our fancy waymarks if you receive enumeration you will move towards the boss and towards the number marker in your circle. If you receive a large aoe you move away from the boss and towards the letter marker. The further back you go the safer it is.

19The boss will cast Secret Breeze which will cleave each of the pillars you are tethered to so be careful and stay towards the edge of your circle. If you move outside the circle you will be sucked into the center and probably die. After resolving your mechanic make sure to spread for a protean

 

20Void Aero IV

 

21Curling Iron – This is a raidwide aoe. If you stand under her during the animation of it you will be knocked slightly out (this interrupts casts and does minor damage) During this next section there are no castbar names so I’ll be inventing ones to use. Cheers.

 

22Curling iron is a raidwide aoe that does moderate damage and changes the arena, leaving a wall that applies a heavy dot so beware.

 

23During the transition preposition around the boss hitbox in your protean spot and 4 dashes will cleave each tank and healer one time. When you are hit by the dash(Brutal Rush), dodge left or right to avoid the line aoe that happens after. Being hit does heavy damage and applies a vuln up

 

24After the final dash the boss makes a swirl type aoe and a center circular aoe at the same time. This is easy to dodge but the tanks do need to stack for a double/shared tank buster

 

25When these resolve move to the center of the boss to avoid having to dodge several Aoes as well as preposition yourself for the next mechanic.

 

26You will see large rock icons appear on 6 players heads. Stack everyone center. Wait for the large AoEs they leave behind baited by the players location when they disappear. Then head to your clockspot’s slice of the swirl safe zones.

 

27Your spread will resolve and enumerations appear on tanks and healers. Have tanks and healers rotate cw to meet their dps partner to share the enumeration. Beware the out AoE followed by an IN AoE

 

28Upon resolution spread to your protean spots and DPS will now be dashed to one at a time. Side step as the tanks and healers did before.

 

29Next is Knuckle Drum. These are several AoEs that hit rather hard in total. Be sure to mitigate and heal through this. 10 regular hits than 1 much more powerful hit.

 

30As the knuckledrum finishes you will have all tanks and healers be targeted for dashes. Additionally 4 players at random will place 4 ground aoes. To resolve, stack  everyone north during the knuckledrum s and rotating cw around the boss until the dashes and puddles finish.

 

31When this ends there will eb a knockback aoe in the center of the arena. Send the party south with its stack and tanks ne/nw with flares.

 

32The boss will then target all 4 dps with dashes and hit them one by one. Spread to protean and sidestep as necessary. Be careful of the 4 aoes dropping for the next mechanic

 

33Teasing tangles 2, this one does not have a cast bar and functions differently. The boss will shoot slow moving discs that if you touch, launch you in the air and most likely kill you. After a few have appeared and gone off, you will be forced out with a point blank aoe. During this 2 of the circles will have both players receive enumerations. Dodge the point blank aoe, then the out aoe, while dodging the discs.. Soon after the outer AoE expires enumeration will go off. However you are given a bit of time after the final ground AoE expires so focus on those first.

 

34Next is another round of Knuckle Drums so I hope you didn’t blow all your mitigation yet.

 

35Iron out is another big raid wide without a cast bar that transitions you back to the original arena.

36Entanglement – players are paired with playstation style markers. Send circle north. triagnel East, Cross south, Square West. This is important for later and is easy to remember as you can just look at the color of your button and the marker. Make sure to space the dps slightly counter clockwise and the tank or healer in the pair slightly clockwise.

 

37After your stun ends, The boss will cleave all cardinal directions wih Secret Breeze. Have one player on each side of the cleave. Make sure to not break your tetherbut be far enough you do not get double cleaved by the protean wave from the boss shortly after the cardinal cleaves.

 

38We get a set of Savage Barbery and Hair Raid. Nothing fancy is added. Next is Void Aero III

 

Entanglement 2. Similar in style to the first version this has some extra things added. Start the same way and wait for the enumerations to appear.

39The enumerations are random on which set of buttons get enumerations. This results in 2 configurations.

 

40First configuration the enumerations are across from each other. Simple walk forward and you will naturally walk into your partner to share.

41The other configuration is the enumerations are next to each other such as circle and triangle being enumerations. For this you go to the only side you reasonable can. Then pair up with each other.

 

42Another savage barbery and hair raid will follow with a void aero iv to close

 

43Curling iron will perform a raidwide and send us back to the arena with the wall that applies a heavy dot.

 

44Start by positioning at proteans. Wait for the 4 dashes to resolve on tanks and healersbefore stacking north of the boss.

 

45The boss will perform Knuckle drums again be sure to mitigate and heal.

46Next you will place aoes start north of the boss, rotating cw until you finish. Next go under the boss and palce your red rock aoes before moving out to your protean position.

 

Dps will receiver 4 dahses one at a time. Simply sidestep as they go off.

47Next is get out, then back in with spread and knockback

48  4 more dashes this time on tanks and heals, side step as necessary.

 

49Now the discs of wind will come from the boss with random aoes on the ground. During this another out then in mechanic.

 

50Following this is a spiral slices safe zone and a shared tank buster

 

51Next off is the same pattern of dodges we had in the beginning where we were able to just stand center to dodge, but this time there is a pointblank aoe so we need to go out and side step. Only small movements are needed here. During this mechanic the party should work their way south and tanks north for another party stack with tank flares.

 

52Next is more knuckle drums

 

Iron out is a raid wide taking us back to the original arena.

 

53Here we basically repeat the previous time we got here.

 

Entanglement

Savage barbery

Hair raid

Void aero v

 

54Enrage (Maelstrom)



<!--EndFragment-->